[Docs]  Add setup content from GET (#1770)
grafana/tempo: docs/tempo/website/setup/tanka.md

---
title: Deploy on Kubernetes with Tanka
weight: 200
---

# Deploy on Kubernetes with Tanka

Using this deployment guide, you can deploy Tempo to Kubernetes using a Jsonnet library and [Grafana Tanka](https://tanka.dev) to create a development cluster or sand-boxed environment.

> This procedure uses MinIO to provide object storage regardless of the Cloud platform or on-premise storage you use.

Author: ```suggestion
This procedure uses MinIO to provide object storage regardless of the cloud platform or on-premise storage you use.
```

> In a production environment, you can use your cloud provider’s object storage service to avoid the operational overhead of running object storage in production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a production environment, you can use your Cloud provider’s object storage service to avoid the operational overhead of running object storage in production.
```
Because you capitalized it in the previous sentence.

Author: Good catch. I've corrected the previous one. Cloud shouldn't be upper case because in this case it's not a proper noun.

This demo configuration includes [metrics-generator](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/next/configuration/#metrics-generator).

To set up Tempo using Kubernetes with Tanka, you need to:

1. Configure Kubernetes and install Tanka
1. Set up the Tanka environment
1. Install libraries
1. Deploy MinIO object storage and configure metrics-generator
1. Deploy Tempo with the Tanka command

>**Note**: This configuration is not suitable for a production environment but can provide a useful way to learn about Tempo.

## Before you begin

To deploy Tempo to Kubernetes with Tanka, you need:

  * A Kubernetes cluster with at least 40 CPUs and 46GB of memory for the default configuration. Small ingest or query volumes could use a far smaller configuration.

>   * `kubectl`

Reviewer: Version requirements?

Reviewer 2: That depends on the API version of Kubernetes I suppose.

Author: @zalegrala What do you think about this? 
```suggestion
  * `kubectl`  (version depends upon the API version of Kubernetes)
```

Reviewer 3: Maybe add `in your cluster` to the end. But yes, all dependent on the API version.

## Configure Kubernetes and install Tanka

> The first step is to configure Kubernetes and install Tanka.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow these steps to configure Kubernetes and install Tanka.
```
Except there are a bunch of steps :)

1. Create a new directory for the installation, and make it your current working directory:

    ```bash
    mkdir tempo
    cd tempo
    ```

> 1. Create a Kubernetes namespace. You can use any namespace that you wish; this example uses `tempo`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a Kubernetes namespace. You can replace the namespace`tempo` in this example with a name of your choice.
```

    ```bash
    kubectl create namespace tempo
    ```

1. Install Grafana Tanka; refer to [Installing Tanka](https://tanka.dev/install).

1. Install `jsonnet-bundler`; refer to the [`jsonnet-bundler` README](https://github.com/jsonnet-bundler/jsonnet-bundler/#install).

## Set up the Tanka environment

Tanka requires the current context for your Kubernetes environment.

1. Check the current context for your Kubernetes cluster and ensure it's correct:
   ```bash
   kubectl config current-context
   ```

> 2. Initialize Tanka. This will use the current Kubernetes context:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Initialize Tanka. This will use the current Kubernetes context:
```

   ```bash
   tk init --k8s=false
   tk env add environments/tempo
   tk env set environments/tempo \
    --namespace=tempo \
    --server-from-context=$(kubectl config current-context)
   ```

## Install libraries

Install the `k.libsonnet`, Jsonnet, and Memcachd libraries.

1. Install `k.libsonnet` for your version of Kubernetes:

   ```bash
   mkdir -p lib

>    export K8S_VERSION=1.22

Reviewer 2: Was this version tested?  I can't remember quite right, but one of the databases had trouble with 1.22 I think.

Reviewer 3: So yes, it previously had issues here, but I talked to Milan Plzik about this, and it just so happens they fixed it a week later. This now all works fine (we went through all the steps verbatim for this).

              # Pulls the default Minio image from Docker Hub
              image: minio/minio:latest
              args:
                - server
                - /storage
                - --console-address
                - ":9001"
              env:
                # Minio access key and secret key
                - name: MINIO_ACCESS_KEY
                  value: "minio"
                - name: MINIO_SECRET_KEY
                  value: "minio123"
              ports:
                - containerPort: 9000
                - containerPort: 9001
              volumeMounts:
                - name: storage # must match the volume name, above
                  mountPath: "/storage"
    ---
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: Service
    metadata:
      name: minio
    spec:
      type: ClusterIP
      ports:
        - port: 9000
          targetPort: 9000
          protocol: TCP
          name: api
        - port: 9001
          targetPort: 9001
          protocol: TCP
          name: console
      selector:
        app: minio
    ```

  1. Run the following command to apply the minio.yaml file:

        ```bash
        kubectl apply --namespace tempo -f minio.yaml
        ```

>   1. To check that MinIO is correctly configured, sign in to MinIO and verify that a bucket has been created. Without these buckets, no data will be stored.

Reviewer: Do these steps within steps render okay?

Author: Yes. It's tricky getting the alignment in Markdown to be correct, but they do render properly.

           },

           bucket: 'tempo-data',
           backend: 's3',
       },

       tempo_config+:: {
           storage+: {
               trace+: {
                   s3: {
                       bucket: $._config.bucket,
                       access_key: 'minio',
                       secret_key: 'minio123',
                       endpoint: 'minio:9000',
                       insecure: true,
                   },
               },
           },
           metrics_generator+: {
               processor: {
                   span_metrics: {},
                   service_graphs: {},
               },

               registry+: {
                   external_labels: {
                       source: 'tempo',
                   },
               },
           },
           overrides+: {
               max_search_bytes_per_trace: 5000000,
               metrics_generator_processors: ['service-graphs', 'span-metrics'],
           },
       },

       local statefulSet = $.apps.v1.statefulSet,
       tempo_ingester_statefulset+:
           statefulSet.mixin.spec.withPodManagementPolicy('Parallel'),
   }
   EOF
   ```

### Optional: Enable metrics-generator

> 

Reviewer: Voice switch to first person here.

> We've enabled metrics generation in the above configuration, but we haven't actually specified anywhere to send the generated metrics data. If you'd like to remote write these metrics onto a Prometheus compatible instance (such as Grafana Cloud Metrics or a Mimir instance), you'll need to include the configuration block below in the `metrics_generator` section of the `tempo_config` block above (this assumes basic auth is required, if not then remove the `basic_auth` section). You can find the details for your Grafana Cloud Metrics instance for your Grafana Cloud account by using the [Cloud Portal](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/account-management/cloud-portal/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've enabled metrics generation in the above configuration, but we haven't actually specified anywhere to send the generated metrics data. If you'd like to remote write these metrics onto a Prometheus compatible instance (such as Grafana Cloud Metrics or a Mimir instance), you'll need to include the configuration block below in the `metrics_generator` section of the `tempo_config` block above (this assumes basic auth is required, if not then remove the `basic_auth` section). You can find the details for your Grafana Cloud metrics instance for your Grafana Cloud account by using the [Cloud Portal](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/account-management/cloud-portal/).
```

```json
storage+: {
    remote_write: [
        {
            url: 'https://<urlForPrometheusCompatibleStore>/api/v1/write',
            send_exemplars: true,
            basic_auth: {
                username: '<username>',
                password: '<password>',
            },
        }
    ],
},
```

> >**Note**: Enabling metrics generation and remote writing them to Grafana Cloud Metrics will produce extra active series that could potentially impact your billing. Make sure that you understand how a number of active series for metrics are generated by reading the page on [metrics generation](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/metrics-generator/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Note**: Enabling metrics generation and remote writing them to Grafana Cloud Metrics will produce extra active series that could potentially impact your billing. For more information on metrics generation, see [metrics generation](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/metrics-generator/) in the Tempo documentation.
```

Reviewer: You might want to link to a billing and usage Cloud topic here? not sure

## Deploy Tempo using Tanka

1. Deploy Tempo using the Tanka command:
    ```bash
    tk apply environments/tempo/main.jsonnet
    ```

> **Note**: If the ingesters don’t start after deploying Tempo with the Tanka command, this may be related to the storage class selected for the Write Ahead Logs. If this is the case, add an appropriate storage class to the ingester configuration. For example, to add a standard instead of fast storage class, add the following to the `config` (not `tempo_config`) section in the previous step:
>
  ```bash
    ingester+: {
      pvc_storage_class: 'standard',
    },
  ```

## Next steps

The Tempo instance will now accept the two configured trace protocols (OTLP gRPC and Jaeger gRPC) via the distributor service at `distributor.tempo.svc.cluster.local` on the relevant ports:

* OTLP gRPC: `4317`
* Jaeger gRPC: `14250`

You can query Tempo using the `query-frontend.tempo.svc.cluster.local` service on port `3200` for Tempo queries or port `16686` or `16687` for Jaeger type queries.

> Now you have a Tempo cluster, it's worth getting some test data into it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you've configured a Tempo cluster, you'll need to get data into it. 
```

This procedure uses MinIO to provide object storage regardless of the cloud platform or on-premise storage you use.
In a production environment, you can use your cloud provider’s object storage service to avoid the operational overhead of running object storage in production.

This demo configuration includes [metrics-generator](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/next/configuration/#metrics-generator).

To set up Tempo using Kubernetes with Tanka, you need to:

1. Configure Kubernetes and install Tanka
1. Set up the Tanka environment
1. Install libraries
1. Deploy MinIO object storage and configure metrics-generator
1. Deploy Tempo with the Tanka command

>**Note**: This configuration is not suitable for a production environment but can provide a useful way to learn about Tempo.

## Before you begin

To deploy Tempo to Kubernetes with Tanka, you need:

  * A Kubernetes cluster with at least 40 CPUs and 46GB of memory for the default configuration. Small ingest or query volumes could use a far smaller configuration.

>   * `kubectl`

Author: ```suggestion
  * `kubectl` (version depends upon the API version of Kubernetes)
```

    ---
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: Service
    metadata:
      name: minio
    spec:
      type: ClusterIP
      ports:
        - port: 9000
          targetPort: 9000
          protocol: TCP
          name: api
        - port: 9001
          targetPort: 9001
          protocol: TCP
          name: console
      selector:
        app: minio
    ```

  1. Run the following command to apply the minio.yaml file:

        ```bash
        kubectl apply --namespace tempo -f minio.yaml
        ```

  1. To check that MinIO is correctly configured, sign in to MinIO and verify that a bucket has been created. Without these buckets, no data will be stored.
     1.  Port-forward MinIO to port 9001:

         ```bash
          kubectl port-forward --namespace tempo service/minio 9001:9001
          ```
     1. Navigate to the MinIO admin bash using your browser: `https://localhost:9001`. The sign-in credentials are username `minio` and password `minio123`.
     1. Verify that the Buckets page lists `tempo-data`.

1. Configure the Tempo cluster using the MinIO object storage by updating the contents of the `environments/tempo/main.jsonnet` file by running the following command:

>    ```bash

Reviewer 2: General philosophy question, is it better to have these large `cat EOF` blocks, or perhaps tell users to create a file with the following contents?  I ask because I think `jsonnet` is a supported code fence, so looking at the block would have some highlighting which might be nicer to look at.  Though perhaps the `jsonnet` fence is only supported on github?

Author: I'll try changing it to jsonnet and we'll see what happens when I build it locally.

>    ```bash

Author: ```suggestion
   ```jsonnet
```

>    ```jsonnet

Author: @zalegrala Hugo did not render the code highlights for Jsonnet.

Reviewer 2: Ah okay, well ignore me then.
